Although there is a tradition of implementing ‘worst case’ and ‘best case’ analyses clarifying the extreme
boundaries of what is theoretically possible, such analyses may not be informative for the most plausible
scenarios (86).


6.2    Empirical evidence of bias due to missing outcome data
Empirical research has investigated the adequacy with which missing data are addressed in reports of trials. A
study that included 71 trial reports from four general medical journals, concluded that missing data are common
and often inadequately handled in the statistical analysis (104).
Concerns over bias resulting from missing outcome data are driven mainly by theoretical considerations. Several
empirical studies have looked at whether various aspects of missing data are associated with the magnitude of
effect estimates (18, 34, 74, 79, 105-107). In a systematic review of meta-epidemiological studies, missing data
were associated with overestimation of effect estimates in some studies, but underestimation or no difference in
others(33). Many of the studies do not differentiate between missing outcome data and participants being
excluded from the analysis (see also section 5.2). In one study, having a dropout rate >20% (versus ≤20%) was
not associated with different effect estimates on average (74).

6.3    Using this domain of the tool
(1) Risk of bias will be low if outcome data are available for all, or nearly all, randomized participants. The
    meaning of ‘nearly all’ in this context is that the number of participants with missing outcome data is so
    small that their outcomes, whatever they were, could have made no important difference to the estimated
    effect of intervention. If this is the case then no further signalling questions need be answered. Absence of
    information about the extent of missing outcome data (for example, when no CONSORT flow diagram was
    provided in the trial report) will usually lead to a judgement of high risk of bias for this domain.
(2) Risk of bias will be low if sensitivity analyses, conducted by either the trial investigators or the review authors
    (see section 6.1.7), confirm that the finding is robust to plausible values of the missing outcome data. Such
    analyses are likely to be particularly useful when the amount of missing data is sufficiently large for the
    potential impact on the estimated effect of intervention to be substantial. If sensitivity analyses confirm that
    the result is robust, then the result may be regarded as at low risk of bias and no further signalling questions
    need be answered.
(3) As explained in section 6.1.3, missing outcome data can only lead to bias if the chance that the outcome is
    missing depends on its true value. It may be possible to exclude this based on reported reasons for missing
    outcome data (for example, if outcome data are only missing because of failure of a measuring instrument
    or closure of a centre in a multicentre trial). However, if it is possible that missingness in the outcome
    could depend on its true value then review investigators will need to consider the proportions of and
    reasons for missing outcome data.
(4) A difference between the experimental and comparator intervention groups in the proportions of missing
    outcome data may indicate a risk of bias (see section 6.1.4). For time-to-event-data, review authors should
    consider whether rates of censoring (loss to follow-up) differ between the intervention groups.
(5) Either reasons for missing outcome data reported by trial investigators, or the circumstances of the trial,
    may lead review authors to conclude that it is likely that missingness in the outcome depended on its
    true value.
(6) Differing reasons for missing outcome data in the experimental and comparator intervention groups may
    lead to substantial bias. For example, in a trial of an experimental intervention aimed at smoking cessation
    there would be serious bias if some comparator intervention participants left the study due to a lack of
    enthusiasm at receiving nothing novel (and continued to smoke) while some experimental intervention
    participants left the study due to successful cessation of smoking.


6.4    Signalling questions and criteria for judging risk of bias
Signalling questions for this domain are provided in Box 8. Criteria for reaching risk-of-bias judgements are given
in Table 11, and an algorithm for implementing these is provided in Table 12 and Figure 4.




                                                          44
