6 Detailed guidance: bias due to missing outcome data

6.1       Background
Randomization provides a fair comparison between two or more intervention groups by balancing, on average,
the distribution of known and unknown prognostic factors at baseline between the intervention groups. Missing
measurements of the outcome, for example due to dropout during the study, may lead to bias in the intervention
effect estimate.
Possible reasons for missing outcome data include (83):
      •    participants withdraw from the study or cannot be located (‘loss to follow-up’ or ‘dropout’);
      •    participants do not attend a study visit at which outcomes should have been measured;
      •    participants attend a study visit but do not provide relevant data;
      •    data or records are lost or are unavailable for other reasons; and
      •    participants can no longer experience the outcome, for example because they have died.
This domain addresses risk of bias due to missing outcome data, including biases introduced by procedures used
to impute, or otherwise account for, the missing outcome data.
Some participants may be excluded from an analysis for reasons other than missing outcome data. In particular,
a naïve ‘per protocol’ analysis is restricted to participants who received the intended intervention (see section
1.3.1). Potential bias introduced by such analyses, or by other exclusions of eligible participants for whom
outcome data are available, is addressed in the domain ‘Bias due to deviations from intended interventions’ (see
section 5), in which the final signalling questions examine whether the analysis approach was appropriate. This
is a notable change from the previous Cochrane RoB tool for randomized trials, in which the domain
addressing bias due to incomplete outcome data addressed both genuinely missing data and data deliberately
excluded by the trial investigators.

6.1.1      Missing outcome data when estimating the effect of assignment to intervention
The effect of assignment to intervention should be estimated using an intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis (8). As
noted in section 1.3.1, the principles underlying ITT analyses are (9, 10):
      (1) analyse participants in the intervention groups to which they were randomized, regardless of the
          intervention they actually received; and
      (2) include all randomized participants in the analysis, which requires measuring all participants’ outcomes.
While the first and second principles can always be followed for participants for whom outcome data are
available, measuring outcome data on all participants is frequently difficult or impossible to achieve in practice.
Therefore, it can often only be followed by making assumptions about the missing values of the outcome.
Even when an analysis is described as ITT, it may exclude participants with missing outcome data, and so be at
risk of bias. Such analyses are sometimes described as ‘modified intention-to-treat’ (mITT) analyses, but others
use this term in different ways (84). Therefore, assessments of risk of bias due to missing outcome data should
be based on the issues addressed in the signalling questions for this domain, and not on the way that trial
investigators described the analysis.

6.1.2      Missing outcome data when estimating the effect of adhering to intervention
As noted above, the potential for bias arising from exclusion of eligible trial participants who did not adhere to
their assigned intervention is addressed in the domain ‘Bias due to deviations from intended interventions’ (see
section 5). Such analyses may be additionally biased if participants are excluded due to missing outcome data.
Appropriate methods to estimate the effect of adhering to intervention (for example, instrumental variable
analyses to estimate the effect of a single intervention that is administered at baseline (5)) may nonetheless
produce biased estimates if participants are excluded due to missing outcome data.
The circumstances in which missing outcome data lead to bias are similar regardless of the effect of interest, so
there is a single set of signalling questions for this domain.




                                                          39
